\\
arXiv:2405.20435 (*cross-listing*)
Date: Thu, 30 May 2024 19:26:51 GMT   (1563kb,D)

Title: Deep Learning for Computing Convergence Rates of Markov Chains
Authors: Yanlin Qu, Jose Blanchet, Peter Glynn
Categories: cs.LG math.PR stat.ML
\\
 Convergence rate analysis for general state-space Markov chains is
fundamentally important in areas such as Markov chain Monte Carlo and
algorithmic analysis (for computing explicit convergence bounds). This problem,
however, is notoriously difficult because traditional analytical methods often
do not generate practically useful convergence bounds for realistic Markov
chains. We propose the Deep Contractive Drift Calculator (DCDC), the first
general-purpose sample-based algorithm for bounding the convergence of Markov
chains to stationarity in Wasserstein distance. The DCDC has two components.
First, inspired by the new convergence analysis framework in (Qu et.al, 2023),
we introduce the Contractive Drift Equation (CDE), the solution of which leads
to an explicit convergence bound. Second, we develop an efficient
neural-network-based CDE solver. Equipped with these two components, DCDC
solves the CDE and converts the solution into a convergence bound. We analyze
the sample complexity of the algorithm and further demonstrate the
effectiveness of the DCDC by generating convergence bounds for realistic Markov
chains arising from stochastic processing networks as well as constant
step-size stochastic optimization.
\\ ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20435 ,  1563kb)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\\
arXiv:2405.20452 (*cross-listing*)
Date: Thu, 30 May 2024 19:58:01 GMT   (927kb,D)

Title: Understanding Encoder-Decoder Structures in Machine Learning Using
 Information Measures
Authors: Jorge F. Silva and Victor Faraggi and Camilo Ramirez and Alvaro Egana
 and Eduardo Pavez
Categories: cs.LG cs.IT math.IT stat.ML
\\
 We present new results to model and understand the role of encoder-decoder
design in machine learning (ML) from an information-theoretic angle. We use two
main information concepts, information sufficiency (IS) and mutual information
loss (MIL), to represent predictive structures in machine learning. Our first
main result provides a functional expression that characterizes the class of
probabilistic models consistent with an IS encoder-decoder latent predictive
structure. This result formally justifies the encoder-decoder forward stages
many modern ML architectures adopt to learn latent (compressed) representations
for classification. To illustrate IS as a realistic and relevant model
assumption, we revisit some known ML concepts and present some interesting new
examples: invariant, robust, sparse, and digital models. Furthermore, our IS
characterization allows us to tackle the fundamental question of how much
performance (predictive expressiveness) could be lost, using the cross entropy
risk, when a given encoder-decoder architecture is adopted in a learning
setting. Here, our second main result shows that a mutual information loss
quantifies the lack of expressiveness attributed to the choice of a (biased)
encoder-decoder ML design. Finally, we address the problem of universal
cross-entropy learning with an encoder-decoder design where necessary and
sufficiency conditions are established to meet this requirement. In all these
results, Shannon's information measures offer new interpretations and
explanations for representation learning.
\\ ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20452 ,  927kb)



\\
arXiv:2405.20550 (*cross-listing*)
Date: Fri, 31 May 2024 00:20:19 GMT   (1009kb)

Title: Uncertainty Quantification for Deep Learning
Authors: Peter Jan van Leeuwen and J. Christine Chiu and C. Kevin Yang
Categories: cs.LG stat.ML
Comments: 25 pages 4 figures, submitted to Environmental data Science
MSC-class: 62D99
ACM-class: G.3
\\
 A complete and statistically consistent uncertainty quantification for deep
learning is provided, including the sources of uncertainty arising from (1) the
new input data, (2) the training and testing data (3) the weight vectors of the
neural network, and (4) the neural network because it is not a perfect
predictor. Using Bayes Theorem and conditional probability densities, we
demonstrate how each uncertainty source can be systematically quantified. We
also introduce a fast and practical way to incorporate and combine all sources
of errors for the first time. For illustration, the new method is applied to
quantify errors in cloud autoconversion rates, predicted from an artificial
neural network that was trained by aircraft cloud probe measurements in the
Azores and the stochastic collection equation formulated as a two-moment bin
model. For this specific example, the output uncertainty arising from
uncertainty in the training and testing data is dominant, followed by
uncertainty in the input data, in the trained neural network, and uncertainty
in the weights. We discuss the usefulness of the methodology for machine
learning practice, and how, through inclusion of uncertainty in the training
data, the new methodology is less sensitive to input data that falls outside of
the training data set.
\\ ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20550 ,  1009kb)


\
arXiv:2405.20857
Date: Fri, 31 May 2024 14:39:46 GMT   (4332kb,D)

Title: Machine Learning Conservation Laws of Dynamical systems
Authors: Meskerem Abebaw Mebratie and R\"udiger Nather and Guido Falk von
 Rudorff and Werner M. Seiler
Categories: physics.comp-ph
\\
 Conservation laws are of great theoretical and practical interest. We
describe a novel approach to machine learning conservation laws of
finite-dimensional dynamical systems using trajectory data. It is the first
such approach based on kernel methods instead of neural networks which leads to
lower computational costs and requires a lower amount of training data. We
propose the use of an "indeterminate" form of kernel ridge regression where the
labels still have to be found by additional conditions. We use here a simple
approach minimising the length of the coefficient vector to discover a single
conservation law.
\\ ( https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20857 ,  4332kb)
